What is covered under Medicare Part B?

Medicare Part B covers most of your routine, everyday care essential medical services and supplies needed for diagnosing and treating medical conditions, including doctor visits, outpatient care, preventive services, durable medical equipment, mental health services, and more. Part A, on the other hand, covers only care and services you receive during an actual hospital stay. If you happen to use the hospital for your lab work or imaging, those fall under Part B.

We outlined some of the services that are covered under Part B above, and here are a few specifics:

    Ambulance services, such as ground transportation to a hospital
    Durable medical equipment, including wheelchairs, walkers, and hospital beds
    Heart disease screenings
    Cardiac rehabilitation, including exercise, education, and counseling
    Cancer screenings, including those for cervical, vaginal, lung, breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer
    Chemotherapy if you have cancer
    Diabetes care, including equipment and supplies (such as test strips and lancets)
    Some acupuncture and chiropractic services
    Physical therapy
    Screenings for depression, diabetes, hepatitis C, and HIV
    Tests, including X-rays, MRIs, CT scans, and EKGs/ECGs
    Flu shots and other vaccines
    Diabetes-related foot care
    Smoking cessation services

Preventative Services Covered

Medicare Part B covers a wide range of preventive services to help keep you healthy and detect potential health issues early. This includes screenings, vaccinations, annual wellness visits, and counseling services.
Outpatient Care Covered

Medicare Part B provides coverage for outpatient care, which includes services and treatments that do not require an overnight hospital stay. This includes visits to doctors’ offices, diagnostic tests, ambulance services, durable medical equipment, certain surgeries, and other medically necessary services.

During the first 12 months that you’re enrolled in Part B, you can also get a “Welcome to Medicare” preventive visit. You’ll meet with your doctor to review your medical history and learn more about the preventive services that are right for you.
What’s not covered under Medicare Part B?

Original Medicare doesn’t cover every medical service. Part A and Part B usually don’t cover:

    Long-term care (such as at a nursing home)
    Most dental care
    Eye exams for eyeglasses
    Dentures
    Cosmetic surgery
    Hearing aids (and exams for fitting them)
    Routine foot care (such as trimming, cutting, or clipping nails)
    Most prescription medications
    Care outside the U.S.

How to gain coverage of gaps in Original Medicare?

Medicare Supplement plans, also known as Medigap plans, are additional insurance policies that work alongside Original Medicare to help cover out-of-pocket costs. While they can fill in the gaps of coverage left by Original Medicare, including deductibles and coinsurance, they do not include prescription drug coverage (Part D). If you need coverage for medications, you would need to enroll in a separate Medicare Part D plan.

You can often get additional benefits through a Medicare Advantage plan as well. Known as Part C, these Medicare-approved plans are offered by private insurance companies. By law, Medicare Advantage plans must offer at least the same level of coverage as Original Medicare. And some plans provide additional coverage not included in Original Medicare such as routine dental and/or vision, hearing, and even prescription medication coverage.
woman
NEW TO MEDICARE?
Learn what you need to know in 15 min or less.
Am I eligible for Medicare Part B?

Most people are eligible for Medicare Part B at age 65, but eligibility can also be based on disability or certain medical conditions.

Specifically, you’re eligible for Medicare Part B if:

    You’re 65 or older
    You have certain disabilities (if you’re younger than 65)
    You have end-stage renal disease (if you’re younger than 65)
    If you’re eligible to receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits, you’ll be eligible to join Medicare after a 24-month waiting period, and you’ll be enrolled automatically.
    If you have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, you’ll be automatically signed up for Medicare when your Social Security disability benefits start.

How can I enroll in Medicare Part B?

You may be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B if you’re already receiving Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board benefits. If you’re not automatically enrolled, you can sign up during specific enrollment periods, such as the Initial Enrollment Period (IEP) around your 65th birthday or the General Enrollment Period (GEP) from January 1 to March 31 each year.
Automatic Enrollment of Part B

Some people will be enrolled automatically, but others will have to sign up on their own. You will be enrolled automatically in Part A and Part B if:

    You’re already receiving benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board (RRB)
    You have a disability and receive Social Security disability benefits. (You’ll have to wait 24 months before you’re eligible. In this case, your Medicare coverage will start in Month 25.)
    You have Lou Gehrig’s disease

Enrollment Periods

If you’re not automatically enrolled, you’ll need to sign up during one of these three enrollment periods:

    Initial Enrollment Period, the seven-month period that begins three months before you turn 65 and ends three months after you turn 65. Special Enrollment Period, which occurs when your coverage from an employer has ended.
    Open Enrollment Period, which takes place from January 1 to March 31 of each year.
    Annual Enrollment Period, which takes place from October 15 to December 7 every year.

During the Initial Enrollment Period, which lasts seven months and begins three months before you turn 65, you can choose between Original Medicare or a Medicare Advantage plan. If you have employer coverage that ends, the Special Enrollment Period allows you to enroll in Part B or choose a Medicare Advantage plan. The General Enrollment Period, from January 1 to March 31, is an opportunity to enroll in Part B, but late enrollment penalties may apply. Consider your healthcare needs and compare plan options to make informed decisions during these enrollment periods.
Can I delay enrolling in Medicare Part B?

Since you have to pay a premium for Medicare Part B, you can delay your coverage.

If you decide to keep your current health insurance, you can sign up for Part B up to eight months after your coverage or employment ends (whichever one ends first) without incurring a late enrollment penalty. This is called your Special Enrollment Period.

Miss this window and your monthly Part B premium may go up 10% for each 12-month period that you could’ve had Part B but didn’t. For example, if you put off signing up for Medicare for two years, you’ll pay a 20% premium penalty for as long as you have Part B.

You may also have to pay this extra fee if you miss your initial enrollment period and don’t have an employer-sponsored plan at the time.
How much does Medicare Part B cost?

Unlike Part A, which is free for most individuals, Part B comes with a cost. Medicare Part B comes with costs that include premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance. The standard monthly premium for Part B in 2023 is $164.90, but this amount may vary depending on your income. The annual deductible for Part B is $226 After meeting the deductible, you typically pay 20% of the Medicare-approved amount for most services. It’s important to note that the costs associated with Part B can change each year, so it’s recommended to stay updated on the current rates.
Income-Related Part B Premiums

The standard monthly premium for Medicare Part B is $164.90 for 2023, though this amount can change from year to year and based on income.

If you collect Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board benefits, your Medicare Part B premium can be automatically deducted from these benefits. If you don’t collect these benefits, you’ll get a bill for Part B every three months.
Who pays higher Part B premiums because of income?

If you (or you and your spouse, if you file jointly) have a higher income, you’ll pay a higher premium. Here’s the breakdown, according to 2023 yearly Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI):



For individuals filing separately	For married couples filing jointly	You pay in 2023
Less than or equal to $97,000	$194,000 or less	Standard premium of $164.90
Above $97,000 up to $123,000	Above $194,000 up to $246,000	$230.80
Above $123,000 up to $153,000	Above $246,000 up to $306,000	$329.70
Above $153,000 but less than $183,000	Above $306,000 but less than $366,000	$428.60
Above $183,000 but less than $500,000	Above $366,000 but less than $750,000	$527.50
Equal to or above $500,000	Equal to or above $750,000	$560.50
Medicare Part B Deductible

The annual deductible for Medicare Part B in 2023 is $226. You usually need to pay this amount before Medicare starts paying its share for covered services.
Coinsurance and Copayments for Medicare Part B

With Medicare Part B, you usually have to pay a 20% coinsurance — meaning a percentage of the cost. For example, if a service costs $100, you would pay $20, while Medicare would pay $80.

Here’s the catch, though: Medicare will only pay a certain price for a doctor’s visit or health service. If your provider accepts that amount — i.e., the “Medicare-approved amount” — then the fee will be covered. If your doctor doesn’t accept Medicare, in some instances you may have to pay the full price for the service.

Also, important to know: Original Medicare has no yearly limit on how much you have to pay for out-of-pocket services. You could be on the hook for thousands if you have a long hospital stay or recovery and don’t have supplemental insurance to help offset the costs.

Medicare Advantage plans, however, do have an out-of-pocket maximum. Once you spend that amount, the rest of your care for the plan year is covered at 100%.